+++
title = "The modern web developer and open source licenses"
author = ["Honza Pokorny"]
date = 2011-05-03T19:00:00-03:00
categories = ["code"]
draft = false
+++

The world of open source is full of wonders. People write code for free and
make it available for free for anyone to use. If you write a quick little
program on the weekend, it's usually because there is a need that has to be
filled. There's a repetitive task that you wish you didn't have to do so you
write a short program to do it for you.

Web development can be hard. You have to worry about your database, your
server-side code, your client-side templates and javascript and it all has to
magically work together. We web developers have created a ton of tools to help
us get the job done. And those of us who are really commited to the best and
most reliable software make what we create in our spare time available for
everyone else to use. We share the awesome idea we had in hopes that someone
had the same problem and we could help them solve it. Massive projects like
Django and Ruby on Rails come to mind. jQuery and Prototype. Fabric and
Capistrano. The list just goes on.

The world of open source is full of wonders. All of this is possible by
releasing our code under a license. And not just any license. If you were to
publish your code online without describing how it can be used, by default you
are reserving all the rights to yourself. Nobody else can legally use it. You
as the creator have the right and responsibility to decide how your code will
be used.

I was introduced to the world of open source by Linux and the GNU movement. For
the longest time, I would claim that the only true open source license is the
[GPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html). It's a great license. It ensures that your software will never be used
in a non-free way (free as in freedom). It works great for medium to large
scale pieces of software, such as the Linux kernel or git. The two are self
contained and don't usually have any dependencies.

However, the more I moved from desktop software development towards developing
for the web, the more I found myself frustrated and confused by the GPL. If a
user downloads a web page generated by a GPL-covered web framework, do I need
to also make available to the user the code that generated the page? If I use
jQuery on my page (which is released under the GPL) and my scripts use it, do I
have to provide non-minified versions of my scripts? Can I legally use a
GPL-covered web framework to build a website for client and not make the source
code available?

There are plenty more options to think about and my head starts to hurt every
time I try to make a sense of it all.

I believe that the General Public License is _unsuitable_ for web-based
projects such as web frameworks, javascript libraries, etc. In a modern web
application, there are way too many moving parts created by different parties.
It's the web developer's job to find the best tools to get their job done. I
believe that the best tools available today are of the open source variety
(MS SQL server, anyone?).

I was reading Jeff Atwood's [article](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/04/pick-a-license-any-license.html) on software licenses and became
convinced that I should abandon the GPL for my projects. After all, I want
people to use my software and making them try and understand the intricacies of
the legal language of the GPL is unnecessary. Starting today, I will make my
projects available under the terms of a more permissive license. My current
favorites are:


## [BSD](http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license) {#bsd}


## [MIT](http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php) {#mit}


## [WTFPL](http://sam.zoy.org/wtfpl/) {#wtfpl}

They are all short and easy to understand. Peoples' time is expensive, let's
not waste it.

If you are a developer and you maintain a project that's useful for making the
web a better place, I would ask that you consider using a permissive license
for your project.

<strong>Update (2012-01-09):</strong> After reading Van Lindberg's [book](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/9780596517960.do) on Open source
licenses, I have learned that the WTFPL isn't a good idea. It doesn't actually
do anything in terms of legal protection or warranty.
