+++
title = "Why the Westminster Reference Bible is the best all-around bible you can buy"
author = ["Honza Pokorny"]
date = 2020-10-30T13:00:00-03:00
draft = false
images = ["/images/wrb.jpg"]
+++

I will argue that the [Westminster Reference Bible](https://can.tbsbibles.org/store/viewproduct.aspx?id=11712549) in black calfskin published
by the Trinitarian Bible Society (TBS) is the best all-around printed bible
that you can buy today in the English language.

I will not be considering digital bibles, or bibles in languages other than
English.  And by _all-around_, I will mean _all-purpose_.  The bible should work
well in as many contexts as possible.  There are specialty bibles that will work
better in some contexts; however, I will focus on having a single bible that can
do everything: preaching, personal and group study, casual reading, hospital
visits, public and family worship.

There are two parts to this evaluation: the translation, and the printed volume
itself.


## The translation {#the-translation}

The Westminster Reference Bible uses the Authorized Version, more commonly
known as the King James Version (KJV).  The KJV was first published in 1611,
and has since enjoyed great popularity.  It has altered the course of the
English language as many of its phrases have entered into common speech.


### The Received Text {#the-received-text}

The KJV was translated from the Reformation-era text of Scripture.  Unlike most
modern English translations of the Bible, the KJV uses the Received Text, as
opposed to the Critical Text as its underlying source.  This means that the KJV
doesn't need to be updated when textual-critical scholarship decides that new
evidence warrants a change of the wording of the Holy Scriptures.  The KJV
unashamedly and proudly includes all of the text of Scripture, and doesn't
neglect any of the contested passages, like Mark 16:9-20 or John 7:53-8:11.


### Transliteration {#transliteration}

The KJV employs an interesting strategy when transliterating proper names to
English.  The Bible was original written in Hebrew (and Aramaic), and Greek, and
those languages don't use the Latin alphabet.  Each proper name must be
transliterated to an English form.  This is common to all translations.  Παῦλος
becomes Paul.  But the way that the KJV goes about it is different.  Many proper
names are rendered differently in the Old Testament, and the New Testament.  For
example, the prophet Isaiah is called _Isaiah_ in the Old Testament, but
_Esaias_ in the New Testament (e.g. Matthew 3:3).  This becomes important in
passages like Hebrews 4:8 where Jesus is said to give rest.  The KJV uses the
word _Jesus_ instead of _Joshua_ as many modern translations do.  This shows the
reader that the two names are the same, and that the context must determine
which person is being spoken of.  The KJV gives you the option; modern
translations don't.


### Singular and plural personal pronouns {#singular-and-plural-personal-pronouns}

The KJV uses archaic personal pronouns like _thou_, _thee_, _thine_, and _ye_.
This is done in order to signal to the reader whether a singular or a plural
form of the verb is being employed in the original languages.  Modern English
doesn't have this ability aside from regional colloquialisms like _y'all_.  This
enables the reader to obtain a greater understanding of the biblical text.


### Void of modern gendered language {#void-of-modern-gendered-language}

The KJV doesn't suffer from modern inclusive language issues.  It doesn't try to
be politically correct.  It doesn't say _brothers and sisters_ where the Greek
original says _brothers_.


### It's final {#it-s-final}

The KJV hasn't changed in centuries, and isn't going to.  This is in stark
contrast with modern translations which need to be updated every few years.

Generations of Christians have read the KJV, and memorized passages from it, and
we can follow in their footsteps.  We don't need to worry that our bibles will
become obsolete with the next update.  We can buy a bible, and it can last us a
lifetime.


### The standard version {#the-standard-version}

The KJV is the only translation which can be considered a standard version.
Thousands of churches recite the Lord's prayer using the words of the KJV
despite using a modern translation in preaching.


### Public domain {#public-domain}

The text of the KJV is in the public domain in most of the world, and is freely
and readily available.  The Word of God is precious.


## The book itself {#the-book-itself}


### Binding and leather {#binding-and-leather}

The book itself is smyth-sewn, and bound in black calfskin.  The calfskin
presents a happy trade-off between quality, price, and comfort.  It's very
durable, feels great to the touch, and isn't very expensive compared to
goatskin.  It's only available in black, the only colour that matters.


### Subsidized cost {#subsidized-cost}

The cost of producing the Westminster Reference Bible is being subsidized from a
large pool of money a generous donor has made available.  Thus, one is able to
acquire a premium bible without a premium price tag.  This shows the integrity
of the publisher, and assures us that their primary interest isn't getting rich.


### References {#references}

The Westminster Reference Bible is a reference edition which means that the text
of Scripture is surrounded by footnotes, and notes.  These notes link various
places in the bible together for study purposes.  This bible has over 200,000 of
such references in its margins.  A regular reference or study bible might have
about 60,000-80,000 references.  These references come from John Brown's
Self-Interpreting Bible.  Using the reference system, one can explore what else
the bible has to say on what is currently being read.

And yet, despite this wealth of information on each page, the text of Holy
Scripture isn't obscured or hard to read.  The helps and reference material only
comes into view when one desires.


### No undermining {#no-undermining}

Despite being a reference edition, it doesn't undermine the reader's confidence
in the text.  The Westminster Reference Bible doesn't include comments on the
quality of the manuscripts used, let alone call any passages into question.

Even R.L. Allan's flagship _Longprimer_ has comments that say that a certain
reading isn't supported by the oldest manuscripts.


### Verse by verse {#verse-by-verse}

The modern trend is to present the text of Scripture in a single-column,
paragraphed setting.  The Westminster Reference Bible is a verse-by-verse,
double-column edition.  This means that the volume can be smaller because the
two columns are more space efficient.  And just like the reference system, it
encourages bible study because it puts the verse number front and center.

It may be argued that verse-by-verse double-column bibles are hard to read.
Yes, I'd say it's more challenging than reading a novel.  However, slower
reading leads greater comprehension.


### Obscure words {#obscure-words}

In addition to its extensive reference system, it also has obsure words
explained inline.  Since the Westminster Reference Bible uses the text of the
KJV, some of the words used won't be easily understood by the modern reader.  To
aid reading, the bible includes short explanations of these difficult words
right on the page.  This includes both archaic words, and so-called false
friends (e.g. _conversation_ used to have the sense of today's _behaviour_).


### Chapter summaries {#chapter-summaries}

Unlike modern editions of the bible, the Westminster Reference Bible doesn't use
headings through the text.  Instead, it uses chapter summaries.  The reader can
quickly gain an overview of each chapter when locating a passage.  Moreover,
these summaries are original to the KJV, and as such are full of Reformed
theology.  This perhaps most obvious in the Psalms, e.g. the summary of Psalm
110 reads:

> 1.A prediction of the kingdom, 4. priesthood, 5. triumphs, 7. and sufferings of Christ.

Or, the Song of Solomon, chapter 1:

> 1.The church's love unto Christ

Chapter summaries are arguably more useful than headings in the text.  If
nothing else, they don't introduce uninspired breaks in the text.


### Pauline authorship of Hebrews {#pauline-authorship-of-hebrews}

The Westminster Reference Bible proudly and rightly announces that the author of
the book of Hebrews is none other than the Apostle Paul.


### Black-letter edition {#black-letter-edition}

Unlike many modern-day editions of the KJV, the Westminster Reference Bible is a
black-letter edition.  This means that all of the words of the Holy Bible are in
black in contrast with red-letter editions which render the words of Christ in
red.  Reformed theology argues that _all scripture is given by inspiration of
God_ (2 Tim 3:16), and should therefore be red.  And red is of course hard to
read.


### Italics {#italics}

The KJV translators felt that certain words not present in the original had to
be added in order to translate a passage better.  These words they marked in
italics.  The Westminster Reference Bible respects their wishes, and prints
these words in italics.  It has been shown that these are somewhat arbitrary and
inconsistent, and one shouldn't rely on them too much; however, they are still
useful in reminding the reader that translating a text from one language to
another isn't an exact science, and a one-to-one correspondence isn't always
achievable.


### No quotation marks {#no-quotation-marks}

Modern bibles introduce un-inspired quotation marks into the text to indicate
when a person starts speaking.  The problem is that sometimes these decisions
are wrong, and affect doctrine in negative ways.  An example of this can be
found in [Acts 19](https://purelypresbyterian.com/2016/04/24/was-johns-baptism-christian/).  The Westminster Reference Bible omits these quotation marks
just like the original text.


### Epistle to the reader {#epistle-to-the-reader}

The printed volume includes the KJV translators' _Epistle to the reader_ where
they explain their motivations.  Sadly, it is common today to exclude this
wonderful letter from printed editions.  This epistle argues against the modern
concept called _KJV Onlyism_.


### Reading plan {#reading-plan}

If this is to be the best all-around bible, a reading plan is a must.  It keeps
the serious student of the word of God on grounded, and on track.  No external
tools are necessary.


### Digital font {#digital-font}

Unlike R.L. Allan's _Longprimer_, the Westminster Reference Bible doesn't pander
to 1950s aesthetics, and it uses a modern digital font.  This makes the page
crisp and clean.


### High view of Scripture {#high-view-of-scripture}

The publisher's high view of Scripture can be seen in their including three
separate pages with quotes from the Bible which highlight the Bible's purity,
and excellence.  Psalm 119:18, Psalm 19:7-11, and 2 Timothy 3:16-17


### Explanation of thees and thous {#explanation-of-thees-and-thous}

The front matter in the book provides a helpful explanation of how the archaic
personal pronouns work.


### Reformed theology {#reformed-theology}

The title page of the Old Testament reads _The Old Testament of Jesus Christ_.
As mentioned above, many of the Old Testament chapter summaries mention.


## Conclusion {#conclusion}

If you want a premium bible for not-much money, a bible with high standards, a
pure text, and a great set of study features, look no further than the
Westminster Reference Bible.
