:title: On having a standard translation of the Scriptures
:date: 2019-04-01 12:00
:categories: theology

On having a standard translation of the Scriptures
==================================================

As I have been thinking through the arguments leveled by the advocates of the
traditional text of Scripture, a certain irritation with modern bible
translations has entered my mind.  Not with any translation in particular, but
with the endless proliferation of them.  James White `echoes`_ this:

    I certainly believe we have all the English translations that we need.
    There is absolutely no need for any further English translations.  And 90%
    of what we have could definitely be retired without causing any problems.
    The reason that we have the number of English translations we have is simply
    business.  It's business and it's money.  Basically, the large Christian
    publishing firms all now have their own English translation.  Zondervan has
    the NIV, Thomas Nelson has the NKJV, and Crossway has the ESV, and Holman
    has the HCSB... This point is, there came a time when if you want to put out
    a study bible, you didn't want to have to pay royalties to someone else
    because that would cut your margin of profit on each of those study bibles.
    So, let's be honest, the origin of the ESV comes from business.  And almost
    all the modern translations, that's the case. [...] Anyway, that's where
    they came from.  We don't need any more NLTs which I wouldn't even consider
    to be a *T* in the first place.  We don't need any more super simplified
    first-grade level translations of the New Testament.  We got a glut of them,
    and most of them aren't really worth the paper they're printed on in the
    first place.  So, the ESV came along, and Crossway knew how to market that
    thing.  I mean, Lockman could have learned something from them.  The ESV
    isn't all that different from the NASB.  I have frequently called it the
    NASB without the semicolons.  But Lockman held way too tight on the NASB.
    They kept it too tightly licensed, and stuff like that.  And the ESV guys
    come along, and man, they hand them out on college campuses and at bible
    colleges.  They locked John Piper in a room until he sang its
    praises. (chuckle) They just did it right.  And it has just exploded, and
    taken over the market. [...]  And it has beaten the NIV to death.  Of
    course, the NIV ended up being purchased by a big, seecular corporation that
    did not know how to handle it.  So, it has really become the big boy.

Christian publishers want to make money, there is nothing wrong with that.  But
why is the increasing number of translations a problem?

The problem is that there isn't and cannot be an expectation of a standard
English text of Scripture.  More and more translations are produced, and every
few years we are asked to switch to the latest and greatest manifestation of
what scholars deem as literal, faithful, and possessing literary beauty.  The
previous incarnation isn't good enough anymore.  Church leaders will write
articles, blog posts, and produce YouTube videos where they will explain to us
why there is a new translation we're asked to consider.  And all of this is
driven by business, as White says.  At this point, you might have your KJV bible
you used when you were growing up, the NIV bible you loved in the 1990s, and now
you claim that the ESV is the best bible translation.

Now, I'm all for being flexible, and adopting new ideas if they are good and
sound.  I have no problem with modern translations *per se*.  I'm not one of
those people in your church who grumble about every change that might be
introduced.  But at the same time, I like continuity and legacy.

``* * *``

Imagine this: You are the first person in your family to become a Christian.
You marry a godly woman, and you start a family.  You do your research, and
after much deliberation you decide that the ESV is the translation you are going
to use.  You invest in nice editions for every member of your family.  Your
church uses the ESV.  You memorize large portions of Scripture in the ESV.  You
teach your children bible verses from the ESV.  You read books that quote the
ESV.  You `read articles`_ that encourage you to write in your bible, and to
pass it down to your children.  You spend spend thousands of hours reading your
bible.  You know where on the page your beloved passages are.  The pages have
scribbles everywhere, many are bent, and ruffled, and some are covered in sweat
and tears.  You spend your life with this bible.  The Lord uses its words to
change you, to "conform you to the image of his Son".  You speak its words of
wisdom to your grandchildren, just as their parents do.

And then, it happens.  A new bible translation is published.  The publisher's
marketing department locks the likes of John Piper into a room until they sing
its praises.  Your church switches to this translation.  Quoted passages in
books and sermons no longer sound familiar to you.  They are like a distant
echo, or a blurry memory.  You are now an elder in your church, and every few
weeks you are asked to read Scripture during worship or to lead the congregation
in prayer.   You bring your beloved bible to the pulpit, and read from it.  The
young people in your church tease you for *still* using *that* old thing.  The
bible you have pored over, and wept over.  You feel betrayed by your church, and
grieve the loss.

``* * *``

Even if you choose a modern translation as your forever translation, you can't
be sure that it won't change from under you.  For example, the ESV was published
in 2001.  Then, it underwent revisions in 2007, 2011, and 2016.  The 2016
edition was originally declared to be the final text, and then the decision was
infamously reverted.  Now, we can expect the ESV to change at some point or
points in the future.

Your other option is to choose the King James Version (I can already see the eye
rolls).  Joel Beeke `wants you to`_.  It was first published in 1611, and
underwent a few revisions, and its final form was produced in 1769.  It is the
bible that sounds like the bible.  It has the *thees* and the *thous*.  It has
words that aren't part of our normal vocabulary anymore.  What's worse, it has
words that don't mean the same thing anymore, and confuse the modern reader.
The Puritans quote the KJV so that would be nice.  The framers of our Reformed
confessions used the KJV.  The church recites the Lord's prayer in the words of
the KJV.  It's probably a bible that's been read for generations in your family.
The text is in the public domain, and so printed editions are cheaper, and there
are tons of free online tools to help you study the bible.

Should the ESV become the new KJV?  The KJV isn't perfect, and neither is the
ESV.  Is Crossway a good steward of a standard translation of the bible?

Does this even matter?  Will our children use printed bibles?  Will they
memorize Scripture or just use the search function of their favorite bible app?
Wouldn't you be better writing your notes into a document or an app on your
computer, instead of in your bible?

.. _echoes: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6adiAs3_UY
.. _read articles: https://www.desiringgod.org/articles/dads-write-in-your-bible
.. _wants you to: https://youngpuritan.wordpress.com/2008/12/11/beeke-on-bible-versions-practical-reasons-for-retaining-the-kjv/
