+++
title = "On why we lack mature Christians"
author = ["Honza Pokorny"]
date = 2011-10-21T20:15:00-03:00
categories = ["theology"]
draft = false
+++

The leadership in the local church is often made up of very incompetent people.
I don't mean incompetent in the sense that they can't lead. I mean in their
knowledge and understanding of theology in general and of the gospel in
particular. The Bible says that the leaders in the church should be first and
foremost able to teach. If you can't teach the Bible, perform mature exegesis
on a text or even struggle to find a book in the Bible, you shouldn't lead.
Yet, this happens all the time. I have a theory on how this happens.

The local church often runs programs that are designed to attract seekers.
People come and are lead to Christ. They pray the sinner's prayer and are
introduced to church life. The original group of evangelists moves on to reach
new people and the new believer is left mostly alone in the sea of church
goers. There is rarely any follow-up. These people are left to themselves. New
believers tend to be very excited about their new-found faith and they read
their Bibles whenever they get a chance.

Time goes on and these new believers learn to walk the walk and talk the talk
in the church. They learn some key concepts about how church life works. They
learn stories from the gospels, they memorize a few verses from Paul's epistles
and they feel good about themselves. They listen to sermons, they go to prayer
meetings and help out where they can. On the outside, it seems that they have
it all figured out and their walk with Christ has been fruitful.

Once they have been in the church for some 30 years, they naturally gravitate
towards leadership roles. They are nominated to serve on the deacon's board or
on the finance committee. Their sense of self-worth rises. They begin to think
that since they made it to their new leadership role, they must be a really
good Christian. After all, they have been in the church for over 30 years. They
have been coming every Sunday, participated in programs and lots more.

However, they haven't been under good Bible teaching. They haven't read their
Bibles in years because they've got it all figured out. They know all the
stories and parables. They know the hymns and worship songs. But they don't
know basic Christian doctrine. They wouldn't be able to explain to you the
doctrine of sanctification, justification or redemption. They lack
understanding of the divine economy.

Moreover, they haven't walked with Christ and therefore lack the practical
knowledge of his grace. They don't pray on a daily basis to align their hearts
with the will of God. They are proud and feel a strong sense of entitlement and
deservedness. They don't reflect on the depths of God and his royal
magnificence. They are obsessed with legalism and rule-keeping. They think that
if they were able to make this far, anyone can. They value tradition. Why
change things if they have worked for so many years? They aren't willing to
learn because they know it all. They won't come to basic Christianity classes
because it would be boring for them.

The saddest thing about this reality is that we allow these unlearned people to
make decisions that impact the life of the wider congregation.

What about those who grow up in the church? They have even tougher times
getting to the truth because of the older generation that is in power. If you
don't read the Bible for yourself, why would you read it for to your children?
If you don't understand a particular text in the Scriptures, how could your
wife?
